impressed me so that when I needed an assistant I
thought about him, wrote him and offered him a job
to come there as an instructor in the mechanical
engineering laboratory
and it was something that he wanted to do so he came
and we had a good relationship there he gradually
promoted himself in the department
and then Just like me in the middle 30s, he wasn't
too happy there. Things changed during the
Depression, you know. If you didn't live through
it, you didn't know just what the conditions were.
Anyhow, he decided to go to the University of
Michigan and take some graduate work, and that's
what he did. And they kept him on the staff up there.
He was just good enough so that they hired him. And
he didn't come back to Kentucky.
In the early spring, early summer, late spring of
1946, that young man, he wasn't too young by that
time, that I had hired in the middle 20s, called me
on the telephone.
And he says, Prof. I've got some research work to do
here which you may be interested in." He knew that I
had been doing research. I had a reputation as a
research engineer somewhat better than that of a
college professor.
And he said, I've got some research. I thought
maybe you'd like to help me. And he went on. We
talked about it. It was some work that he had to do
for the Army Ordnance Department located there in
Detroit. And he offered me a salary. He mentioned a
salary, which was almost twice what I was getting
at Kentucky.
And since I was beginning to get a little bit tired
of that work I was doing there for the agriculture
department, couldn't see much future to it, I just
accepted the job. So I went to Michigan and Ann
Arbor.
When we saw that it was going to take too long to get
some of the equipment we needed for this research
project, then the department head up there and
others just got together and they said, well, why
don't we extend this project over a period of two
years? In the meantime, we'll give O'Bannon some
teaching. So they did that. I got three fifths of my
salary for teaching and two fifths for research.
That is to say, the M.E. department paid me
three-fifths of my salary for teaching. That's
two courses of thermodynamics. And the research
institute paid me two-fifths for doing the
research. And that went on for two years. And it
took that long to complete the work. I barely
finished it. What was the nature of the work? It had
to do with what they called vehicular equipment.
It never was spelled out specifically in any of the
reports it was what the army department labeled as
restricted and the only report that ever came from
it was the one that i wrote and put into the research
institute there which was transferred to the army
and if they followed their practice they kept it
secret it retained the lubrication of bearings on
army tanks. During the war, they would order oil,
and they didn't know whether they would get oil for
the Sahara Desert or oil for Alaska. They took two
different kinds of oil, and what they wanted to use
in Alaska, I'm just using that as an illustration,
should have been sent to Sahara, or it wasn't the
kind of job all they needed for low temperature
operation. And what they got in Africa was the oil
they needed for high temperature. What they were
looking for was one oil that they could use any
place over the world. And that was my job. They
would send me all kinds of lubricating oils for
these bearings on these tanks. And my job was to
find out the characteristics of those oils and
eventually, if possible, Find one R that could be
used anywhere in the world regardless of the
temperature. Desert, North Pole, or whatever.
And that I did. That was my job. And I think I did a
good job. But nobody will ever know because it was
never published. It was restricted.
Army secret. Hey, you left there.
What was the circumstances of your coming to
College Station? There again, you asked for a
story.
Professor Crawford here was head of the M.A.
Department at that time. He wrote to the
University of Michigan inquiring about somebody
up there who'd come here and be on his staff. And his
specifications fitted my specifications. And
when this friend of mine, who learned about it
indirectly. He called me on the phone. He says,
prop, she says there's a man down in Texas who's
looking for a college professor. Well, this young
man and my friend in Michigan knew that I was
beginning to get a little bit tired of research and
I'd be happy to get back into the classroom. And
what changed my attitude was that those two
courses, the classroom courses that I taught at
Michigan, which was just an accident, just a
coincidence. When I did that, I said, never again.
I'm never going to do another bit of research. If I
can't get a teaching job, I just quit, period.
Well, this turned out to be a teaching job, at least
I thought it was. So I wrote him a letter, and I
talked to Crawford on the telephone. We talked one
Monday.
And he described the job, and it sounded good to me.
And he mentioned the salary, which was about what I
was getting in Michigan. And I expressed some
interest in it. And he says, well, how soon can you
be here? I said, school starts next Monday. That
was just a week away. Next Monday? And he says,
yeah. And I says, hesitate a little bit. And I says,
I'll be there on Friday.
So I met Crawford at the bus station up here Friday
of that week and started teaching the following
Monday. How long did it take you to get your
belongings made? I packed a suitcase, and that's
all it was. I left everything else. Didn't bring
the family. I left everything else. Oh, I see. You
finally stayed in Michigan for a while. Our
children were in high school there, and there
wasn't any question about bringing the family.
They had to stay there and finish high school. And
my wife was pleasant enough about it. She agreed.
And since she knew that I wanted the job, she
couldn't object. So she just says, go on. Get off.
We'll take care of it.
Late January. After the first term of school
stopped in Lexington, and our children could then
leave.
Between terms, you see. Your family didn't go to
Michigan? No, no, the family stayed in Lexington
while I was in Michigan. See, this was just a
temporary thing up there in Michigan. Oh, I see. No
thought ever of my being there permanently. I knew
that. Everybody knew that. This was a special job
that I was doing with this friend of mine for the
Army Ordinance Department. And the only reason at
all that I went was... Well, there were two
reasons. The first place was the salary.
I had... gotten, like everybody else there, I
received a cut during the Depression. And if I had
stayed in the engineering college, I probably
would have advanced money-wise. But since I was in
the agricultural college, where the salaries
were not quite up to what I had enjoyed in the
engineering college, I was pressed a little bit
salary-wise. So when they offered me almost twice
what I was making there in Kentucky, I just jumped
at it just like that. What were your impressions of
coming to Texas compared to what you'd been used to
in Kentucky and Michigan? What kind of experience
was it to move that far? You mean in the department,
department-wise? No, I mean just generally.
I had never been to Texas, so I didn't know anything
about it from personal experience. I had read
about the University of Texas and a little bit
about Texas A&M University and oil industry in
Houston and so forth and so on. So I wasn't ignorant
of the state, but I'd never visited it.
And I rode a train from Lexington to Louisville, to
Dallas. Train got in late in Dallas. I missed my
train that morning to College Station. So I was
going to have to wait all day in Dallas for another
train. So I got the bright idea about a bus. I saw
something about a bus. So I thought, I'm going to
just get on this bus and ride to College Station
instead of waiting all day in Dallas. Longest bus
ride I ever had in all my life. Stopped at every
crossroad between Dallas and College Station. I
got in here at 7 o'clock. If I had waited and caught
the train out of Dallas, I'd have had a nice
pleasant stay in Dallas and gotten here at 8
o'clock.
Professor Crawford met me and he took me to his home
where I stayed all night. And the next day, which
was Saturday, recommended that I go up around
North Gate here and look for a room, and I did find a
boarding house up there at the North Gate where I
lived until my family got here.
That wasn't the question you asked. What was it you
asked? Well, wait, if you asked about how I like
Texas or something to that effect, well, I'll tell
you and I'll tell everybody else, there's no
better place in Texas to live than College
Station.
of the gulf so you get away from all of that
hurricane high moisture area storms and so forth
from the gulf you're far enough south so you got
away from all of those northers that run through
there north waco around dallas and fort worth
you're far enough west so you get away from all that
swampy area over there in east texas western
louisiana And you're far enough east so you can get
away from all the sandstorms in West Texas. So
where else can you live that's any better than
College Station? I tell everybody that. So I've
been happy here as far as that is concerned. What
did your wife think of when she came here? I beg your
pardon? What did your wife think of moving to
Texas? She just accepted it. She's always been a
good wife, good mother. And she fitted in here just
fine. She was a very pleasant individual. She
started going to meeting the wives and going to
bridge parties and women's social clubs and
church activities and things of that sort. It
seems to have fit in here very well. Was College
Station very much different from Lexington in
those days? Oh yes, quite a bit different. College
Station was a country town when I came here. And
that's one of the things I've hated to see change.
It's grown into a small, gaudy, bocce, pothole
city. It was a nice country town when I came here in
the fall of 48. You go from here to Bryan, you drove
through a wooded area. You didn't see a house
except every quarter of a mile or something like
that. It's changed tremendously. When has the
most tremendous change occurred
since you've been here? Well, the biggest change
came, of course, after Sputnik in 57. Up to that
time, 57, things... I changed gradually, the
enrollment increased, there was more building,
faculty increased, and so forth and so on. When I
came here in 48, I contacted Culpeper Realty
Company, looking for a place to buy, for my family
to live in.
Their agent could not show me one house in Brazos
County that I could buy that wasn't an old house
either run down so that the builder was trying to
sell it or else it was rented at a normal price and
lived in by tenants. There were two little
two-bedroom houses over there on the east side
across the highway that were built by two
lumbermen who came from East Texas over here and
built them, thinking that, well, they would be
able to sell them at a profit. And they didn't sell
them. They were finished in the summertime before
I got here. I looked at them in September when they
were first shown to me. And they stayed there
through October and November and December. Long,
I think, is about maybe the latter part of
December.
After I'd gotten prices quoted to me and so forth, I
stepped in the Culpepper's office and told them, I
said, I'll give you so many thousand dollars for
those two houses and the two extra lots. And they
were surprised. So, well, he says, we'll have to
talk to the owners. So they wrote to the owners in
East Texas and right like that, they came back and
accepted it. They'd been trying to sell those
houses for two or three months. So I bought two
small two-bedroom houses, one-bath houses, on
four lots. There's a house, a vacant lot, a house,
and a vacant lot. And that's where I moved my
family. They moved into that when they came here in
the latter part of January. You moved into one of
the two houses? Well, we lived in one house, and I
rented the other. I see. We had moved out of a
five-bedroom house in Lexington, Kentucky.
Moved all of our furniture here. We had more
furniture than we needed for two houses. So the
only thing extra I had to buy was a stove for the
kitchen and a refrigerator for the kitchen.
Everything else we had. We just split between the
two houses. I rented one house. I could have bought
the whole thing outright for the money I got for our
property in Lexington, but I decided that this was
a Federal Housing Administration or something of
the sort. FHA loans were very popular in those
days, and about 4% or 5% interest, something like
that. So I decided to just take out a loan, and I did
that. And the rent that I got from this second house
paid for the loan.
My experience here on this campus has been very,
very pleasant. I've enjoyed every minute of it.
You see, because I had a good job doing what I wanted
to do. It was all, no research whatsoever. That's
another story. As you talk about
1948-64 here, 1948-1964, I was on the teaching
staff doing nothing but teaching. You did no
research at all during that time? Didn't what? Did
you do any research at all while you were A&M?
Absolutely none. None? No. The only way I was
concerned in the least bit with research was when I
had graduate students who, and I didn't have very
few of those because I didn't care for them. What
did you teach during the years that you were at A&M?
I always say I taught thermodynamics. That's
really the only thing I ever taught was
thermodynamics. But I also had other
responsibilities. I had courses in
refrigeration, which is 95% thermodynamics. I
had courses in air conditioning, which is 95%
thermodynamics.
And
then after a while, Professor Crawford gave me a
problem course that he taught to freshmen, which I
enjoyed. But for the most part, ever since I've
been here, I've been concerned with
thermodynamics. I don't know whether you know
what thermodynamics is. In the broad sense, it's
defined as the science of energy, which means it
includes everything. So there isn't anything
that goes on that isn't concerned with energy in
one way or another. But specifically,
thermodynamics is concerned with the
transformation
of one form of energy into another form of energy,
in particular, heat energy into mechanical
energy. That's what thermodynamics is really all
about. But you can go over to the chemistry
department and get a course in thermodynamics.
There, they are concerned with heat transfer
energy transformations in chemical processes,
whereas I was concerned chiefly with the
generation of power, use of gas, oil, coal, to
produce heat, to make steam, to produce power,
just like you have in a power plant here. That was
the kind of work that I was primarily concerned
with way back with the U.S. Steel Corporation.
Were you teaching a separate course in air
conditioning? I had the only course in air
conditioning. It was just one scheduled class in
air conditioning. When was this taught? Well,
they started teaching it before I came here. I just
took over. You taught it the whole time you were
here? I just took over from another professor who
had been doing this work and carried on. I taught
the course up until I went on modified service in
1959. You don't remember that modified service?
That's between 65 and 70. Yeah.
You taught three-fifths of time, three-fifths
pay for three years, and then half pay for two
years. And when you reached 70, you were out. Did
you do any research in air conditioning while you
were teaching the schools? Here? No. As I say, all
of my research, most of my research was done
between 1920 and 1948. I quit research after I came
here to get away from the search. I can't get that
across to anybody. Why did you become
disillusioned with research? Because of the
length of time that it takes to put into it? The only
instruments I ever used were temperature and
pressure measurement instruments. Every
conceivable means of measuring pressure I was
familiar with. Every conceivable means of
measuring temperature I was familiar with. I
never did any kind of research that didn't involve
sticking thermometers and pressure gauges on
some kind of equipment. And when you do that for how
long, 30 years more or less, you get darn tired of
it, period.
I saw two things happen. The research work was
getting to be more and more less experimental,
which was the kind I was familiar with, and more and
more mathematical.
In the old days, when I started out and kept it up for
years, if you had an engineering problem, you'd go
out to the laboratory and you'd set up some
equipment. and you run an experiment, take some
data, and then you go back to your desk, you start
studying it, you plot some curves and so forth, and
you find out the solution to the problem. You don't
do that today. Today, the college professor will
sit down at his desk and start using matrix algebra
and tensor calculus and differential equations,
analyzing the problem from a mathematical point
of view. And he may never go into the laboratory.
And he writes that all up and gives to whoever is
paid for the research. And once in a while, you'll
find some parameter of some sort where you'll have
to go into the laboratory and run an experiment to
find the value of it before you can substitute in
these equations you see to get your result. We have
men over there in the ME department, and I guess all
over the campus, whose own research consists of
mathematics, 99% mathematics, although it will
pertain to some kind of mechanical or engineering
or other problem.
Well, I hadn't trained myself for that kind of
research, the mathematical aspect. If I'd have
stayed in research here, I would continue to work
in the laboratory, which I was trying to get away
from. Now, the other thing that I saw happening was
the shift from that old-fashioned means of
measuring pressure and temperature that I was
using to modern electronics.
I came here, I was 54 years old.
And I couldn't see myself trying to learn
electronics. That was for the next generation. I
was going to get out of research completely and
turn it over to the next generation. I don't know
whether that makes sense or not. Before you came to
A&M, did you do any research in air conditioning?
In a way, in a broad sense.
such things as fans, which are essential for most
air conditioning systems. I ran tests on heating
coils. What was the first air condition? Heat air
with steam condensing in coils. And I made tests on
unit heaters, which was a kind of self-contained
air conditioning as you stick under windows and
blow in air from outside, blow it into the room, and
you heat it or you cool it or you humidify it and so
forth. That's air conditioning. But I never did
any kind of research on the kind of air
conditioning that you would put in, say, Zachary
Engineering Building or the Biltmore Hotel in Los
Angeles or some office building in Houston, which
would run into thousands of tons of refrigeration
and millions of dollars. I never did that kind of
research. My research was detailed
research that you could, where you could set up an
experiment in the laboratory, take the data,
analyze the results, write a paper, and so forth.
I've written, I don't know, dozens more papers
that have been published on the research that I've
done in that general field. I run tests on the steam
boilers, small steam boilers such as you put in
buildings which supply steam for air
conditioning heating systems. And I ran a test on
small underfeed stokers which are used, and some
of them as small as for private residences, which
often turned out to be part of a larger heating,
ventilating, air conditioning system. See, air
conditioning itself is sort of a vague term.
It embraces a lot of things. It's just not
and ashtray conditioning includes not only
control of temperature, humidity, air motion,
circulation of the air, cleanliness of the air,
and I don't know how many other things, at least
five separate aspects of what we talk about air
conditioning. Now to one manufacturer air
conditioning may mean nothing more than just
Maybe washing or filtering the air, something
like that, equipment of that sort. Another
manufacturer, his air conditioning may include
just the coils that the air runs through to heat it
or cool it. Another might be just fans. I run tests
on fans. When did you run these tests regarding air
conditioning? When was this done, your tests on
air conditioning? The kind I'm talking about?
I don't think I want to answer that. I'll start not
at the beginning, but later
on. I'll start, say, with 1920. Do you know when the
first air conditioning was invented? Do you
happen to know? Well, I followed the development
of air conditioning all the way from the time I
entered college as a freshman in 1911, when nobody
ever heard of the term, right on up until the
present day, you might say.
air conditioning developed over a period of 100
years, and in particularly a period of the last 75
years.
From the standpoint of the kind of air
conditioning that you write about and read about
in textbooks,
which is taught in schools today, that kind of air
conditioning started around 1901 or 1902, and
gradually developed over the years. There was
what can be referred to as earlier beginnings that
go back decades. But they were all crude
inventions of one sort or another. But the air
conditioning profession
Carrier, Carrier Air Conditioning Corporation.
He's known as the father of air conditioning. And
he worked with the Buffalo Forge Company. He
graduated from Cornell in
I guess 1901. And he
started working at the Buffalo Forge Company in
that same year. He was born in some western New York
town not far from Buffalo City.
So this was a natural place for him to start. He was a
farm boy to start with.
At that time, Buffalo Forge Company didn't make
anything other than fans, I think, just air
blowing
equipment. Fans were used for supplying
ventilation air to rooms and so forth, and for
heating and so on. You had to have fans to move the
air, so you talk about fans just like you talk about
a locomotive or a train, you see. It's one of those
essential things. And that's where he got his
start. And he kept adding on, adding on, building
on to that, learning more about air. and its
practical uses in various industries, textile,
paper, and tobacco industry,
and finally into human comfort, hotels,
and dining cars, and places like that. It has had a
slow, gradual growth throughout the years, right
up to the present time. If you want to know
something about modern air conditioning, say
since 1964, or even about 1959, you better get some
young fellow over there in the A&E department to
tell you about it. Because my experience all went
way back in those early days. Let me change the
subject slightly. What was the change that you saw
at Texas A&M
It's a continuation of the same change that I
talked about a little bit ago. The faculty losing
control and the emphasis
changing from seeing the students were taught the
proper subjects compared to how in the hell are you
going to get the money to pay the staff to teach
those subjects. I don't know whether that makes
sense to you or not, but it's a switch from
education per se to the monetary aspects. Now, if
there's any one thing that I object to in those 16
years that I've taught here between 1948 and 64,
I considered myself primarily a teacher, always
knew that I was never going to get rich teaching.
That's the only thing I ever wanted to do was to
teach. There's nothing I like to do better than
stand up behind a desk in front of a group of
students and tell them something that I think they
ought to know. I get more kick out of that than
anything I've ever done in all my life. That's the
only thing. I didn't know that until I started
teaching. But after I did that, I knew that was the
only thing I'd ever wanted to do in all my life. And I
think I got that from my father and mother. My
father was a physician who was a country doctor
who never got paid for more than half of the work
that he did from patients. When I looked over his
books when he died, there were tens of thousands of
dollars of accounts that had never been paid. He
was just a kind old gentleman, country doctor, who
would wait on anybody and charge them almost
nothing. My brother-in-law was sitting in his
office, outside his office one day, and he had a
couple in his office. My father had a couple in the
waiting room. And when they got through and the
patient was leaving, he asked my father, he says,
how much do I owe you? And my father said, 75 cents.
Man paid the 75 cents, took it out of his pocket,
found three quarters, I guess it was, gave him 75
cents. My father came out of the office into this
ante room where my brother-in-law was sitting. My
brother-in-law heard the whole thing. He says,
Doc, what do you mean charging that man 75 cents?
Well, he says, I knew that fellow. If I'd have said a
dollar and a half, he'd have said charge it and I
never got another penny. That's the kind of man he
was. My mother was an ardent church-going person.
There was various women church organizations,
WCTU, and I don't know what. She was involved with
all of those things. My father was a lay preacher.
He'd get out into the county and country churches
and deliver sermons. He taught Sunday school
class. What church? This was a Christian church,
the Disciples of Christ. or sometime known as
Campbellite.
So that was the kind of home environment that I was
raised up in. So I never had any ambition to make a
million dollars. My only ambition was, I didn't
understand this, now you understand. This was all
just stuff that I absorbed unconsciously. But I
know now.
for people, just like my father and mother were
doing. And somehow or another, I translated that
in terms of teaching, getting up in front of young
people and telling them history and so forth. And
that's the only thing I've ever wanted to do all my
life. And nothing would suit me better right now
than you to take me out here and put me behind a desk
and talk to a dozen people, you see. Just the way I'm
talking to you now. That's what I've always wanted
to do. Well, what were some of the changes that
occurred in regard to student violence?
Obviously, you've got to go back through the 50s
and 60s and 70s and talk about hippies and student
demonstrations and everything of that sort. I
grew up in that period, just like you did and
everybody else. When I came here in 48, it was the
war atmosphere, or rather the war being over type
of atmosphere, getting away from
hard duties such as demanded of people in the Army
and
concentrating on learning something so that you
could get out into the profession and make a
living. That was the whole attitude. The attitude
among the students that I saw here after 48, nearly
30 years, was getting a job. Just becoming
proficient in something so that they could get a
job, hold down their job. Now they were not looking
for shortcut ways of getting out of doing
something on campus. and having somebody give
them a job just because they had a degree, they were
actually interested in learning something.
You'd get up in front of a group of students in the
classroom and you got the impression that they
wanted to learn what was in the textbook and what
you wanted to teach them.
That gradually, over a period of those 16 years,
and maybe it's still going on, changed to that damn
degree in any way you can, whether you learn
anything or not, and get out there and get this job.
It's emphasis on the job and using the degree as a
ticket to get the job. That was the thing that
became important. Now, when did that change take
place? I'll give you one guess.
It was when Sputnik was launched. The whole nation
practically panicked. Look what the Russians
have done. They put this thing up there in the sky.
They can start bombing the whole nation any time
they wish. We're all doomed to destruction. What
are we going to do about it?
And on the campus, that reaction was that we've got
to get some new people, bring in some new
high-powered instructors from outside at any
price. got to increase the staff, increase the
quality of the staff. That's the important. So
that we bring ourselves up to where we're even with
the Russians and start developing this new
technology.
Do you remember anything about the Committee of
100 or something like that? That began
shortly after 1957, the
AAUP and other organizations on this campus
started what they called the— The American
Association of University Professors. Yeah.
What did that—it was the Committee of 100. Their
idea was to go out in the state and find businessmen
and other people who they thought was interested
in education and had influence among people who
owned oil wells and other property. And let's
start a new program on this campus here which would
enhance education bring it up to a higher
standard, increase the quality and so forth, so
that we could compete with the Russians.
That was the big change that took place. Now you
can, you yourself and everybody else, can put your
own experience in that attitude,
a switch from knowledge itself to
position.
Using your position to advance regardless of your
knowledge. I'm not saying that exactly right, but
you get the point, I'm sure.
That kept up and is still going on. I'll go back to
the moment ago. We were talking about bringing
people in from outside
And when Dean
Calhoun came here. First name? Dean Calhoun. He is
the chancellor or whatever he is. He came here as
dean of engineering about 55, 56. Do you remember
his first name? Hmm? Do you remember his first
name? Calhoun.
Oh gosh, just look it up in the catalog.
I should remember his name.
I was on a committee of staff that met once a month.
And about once a semester, we would invite the dean
of engineering to come talk to us. And
I remember Dean Calhoun was the dean, and he was
talking to us on various topics. And now he says,
you know, we're going to have to go out and find men
of high quality and bring them here. put them on our
staff in order to improve the quality of our staff.
That's an insult to anybody on this staff. What's
wrong with the quality now? Anyhow, that's what he
said, you see. And to improve the quality of our
staff, we got to go out and bring people in. He
didn't say any particular university, but he was
thinking about Harvard and Yale and Princeton.
Chicago and other places, bringing faculty. Now
he says, of course we're going to have to pay them
more than we're paying you now.
Everybody just absolutely quiet, no reaction.
And he went on talking. After a few minutes I spoke
up and I said, it looks to me like the only way you get
ahead in this business is to change your position.
Oh, no. He just almost panicked. He could just see
everybody in the room, everybody on campus,
everybody, staff member in the engineering
corner getting up and going someplace looking for
a position. He was losing his whole staff. Oh, no,
no, no. I said, you just got through telling us
about bringing in these people from outside,
bringing them here and paying us more than you're
paying us now. I didn't tell him this, but he got the
implication. He had just come here to be dean,
enhancing his position at a higher salary. If
there's anything I object to over the past 5, 10,
15, 20 years, is my training a student and sending
them out into industry